.\"
.\" man page introduction to Clasp
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2024, Clasp Developers
.\"           All Rights Reserved
.TH CLASP 1 "20 June 2024"
.SH NAME
Clasp -- A Common Lisp native compiler using LLVM
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBclasp\fP [ --help ] [ --noinform ] [ --noprint ] [ --disable-debugger ]
[ --non-interactive ] [ --feature \~\fIfeature\fP ]
[ --eval \fIform\fP | --load \~\fIfilename\fP ]*
[ --norc ] [ --version ] [ \~\fIother options\fP ]

.SH DESCRIPTION

\fBClasp\fP is an implementation of Common Lisp primarily designed for
compatibility with C++-language programs and libraries.

Supported operating systems are Linux distributions Arch, Debian/Ubuntu, Fedora,
Gentoo, and also MacOS. Its requirements (build and runtime) are primarily LLVM
(versions 15 through 18), and several of the standard Common Lisp libraries.

.SH RUNNING CLASP

Running clasp without any arguments starts the interactive Read / Evaluation /
Print Loop (REPL). At the prompt you may enter a Lisp expression; it will be
executed, any values it produces will be printed, and you will recieve another
prompt allowing you to enter another expression.

\fBTo exit clasp\fP enter the expression "\f(CR(ext:quit [integer])\fR" (and
return), or type a ^D (control-D).\fP The integer argument, if provided, is used
as the exit status; the default is zero. \fI(N.B. The shell will treat 0 as
true, non-zero as false/error.)

\f(CR
  $ clasp
  ...[startup banner]...
  COMMON-LISP-USER> (* 6 7)

  42
  COMMON-LISP-USER> (ext:quit)
\fR

.SH COMMAND LINE OPTIONS

This is a summary of the most common options. The \f(CR\-\-help\fR option
will display the full list of supported options, environment variables,
and \f(CR*features*\fR flags.
.TP 3
.B \-\-noinform
Skip messages at startup.
.TP 3
.B \-\-noprint
Start a read-eval loop instead of a read-eval-print loop, and don't prompt. This
is intended for scripts (\fIe.g.\fP piping a list of forms to Clasp).
.TP 3
.B \-\-disable-debugger
Set things up so that if the default debugger would be entered, Clasp quits with
a backtrace and nonzero exit status instead. \f(CR*debugger-hook*\fR and
\f(CRext:*invoke-debugger-hook*\fR (below) work as usual, \fIi.e.\fR this
setting does not affect them.
.TP 3
.B \-\-non-interactive
Rather than starting a REPL, quit. This is intended to be used with \f(CR\-\-eval\fR and \f(CR\-\-load\fR. Implies \f(CR\-\-disable-debugger\fR.
.TP 3
.B \-\-feature \~\fIfeature\fP
Intern "\fIfeature\fP" as a keyword and push it to \f(CR*features*\fR.
.TP 3
.B \-\-eval \~\fIform\fP
Evaluate the given form. \f(CR\-\-eval\fR and \f(CR\-\-load\fR options are
processed in order from left to right.
.TP 3
.B \-\-load \~\fIfilename\fP
\f(CRcl:load\fR the given file. Intended for convenience, since \f(CR--eval
(load ...))\fR could involve annoying quotation issues.
.TP 3
.B \-\-norc
Do not load \f(CR~/.clasprc\fR (see below).
.TP 3
.B \-\-help
Displays a full list of options, environment variables, and feature flags.
.TP 3
.B \-\-version
Displays the program version string and exits.
.PP
If the file \f(CR~/.clasprc\fR exists, Clasp will \f(CRcl:load\fR it before
processing \f(CR\-\-eval\fR and \f(CR\-\-load\fR options and starting the REPL.

.SH CREDITS

Clasp is the project of Dr. Christian Schafmeister. Additional contributions
have been made by Alex Wood, Karsten Poeck, and many other contributors as seen
in the Git history.

Clasp's source code is derived substantially from that of Embeddable Common
Lisp. Code from SBCL and SICL has been incorporated as well. Most notably, the
compiler is SICL's Cleavir compiler with some minor customizations.

.SH ENVIRONMENT

See the \f(CR\-\-help\fR option for a complete list.

.TP 10n
.BR CLASP_DEBUG \~\fIfilenames\fP
Define files that generate log info when \f(CRDEBUG_LEVEL_FULL\fR is set at
top of file. \~\fIfilenames\fP is separated with spaces or commas.
.TP 10n
.BR CLASP_HOME \~\fIdir\fP
Define where clasp source code lives.
.TP 10n
.BR CLASP_FEATURES \~\fIfeatures\fP
Set \f(CR*features*\fR (separate multiple features with spaces or commas).

.SH FILES

.TP
.I ~/.clasprc
Optional per-user start-up script.

.SH SEE ALSO

Clasp project home page
.IP
<\f(CRhttps://github.com/clasp-developers/clasp/tree/main\fR>
.PP
Clasp manual
.IP
<\f(CRhttps://github.com/clasp-developers/clasp/wiki/Manual\fR>
.PP
Building from source
.IP
<\f(CRhttps://github.com/clasp-developers/clasp/wiki/Building-and-Installing-from-Source\fR>
.PP
Real-time chat
.IP
\f(CR#clasp\fR IRC channel on Libera <\f(CRhttps://web.libera.chat\fR>
.PP
.SH LICENSE

CLASP is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the terms of the GNU Library General Public License as published
by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2.1 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version; see file 'Copying'.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU Library General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU Library General Public License
along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
